# PRB: Calling LoadLibrary() to Load a DLL That Has Static TLS

(This knowledge base article is no longer available. This backup is retrieved from [BetaArchive Wiki](https://www.betaarchive.com/wiki/index.php/Microsoft_KB_Archive/118816). Original copyright notice: © 2001 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.)

The information in this article applies to:

- Microsoft Win32 Application Programming Interface (API), used with:
  - Microsoft Windows NT Server versions 3.5, 3.51, 4.0
  - Microsoft Windows NT Workstation versions 3.5, 3.51, 4.0
  - Microsoft Windows 95
  - Microsoft Win32s versions 1.1, 1.15, 1.2, 1.25a
  - Microsoft Windows 98
  - the operating system: Microsoft Windows 2000
  - the operating system: Microsoft Windows Millennium Edition

## SYMPTOMS

A dynamic-link library (DLL) uses `__declspec(thread)` to allocate static thread local storage (TLS). There are no problems associated with running an application that is linked with the corresponding static library. However, when an application uses the `LoadLibrary` function to load the DLL instead of using the static version, `LoadLibrary` fails on Win32s with an error code 87: invalid parameter.

`LoadLibrary` succeeds on a computer that is running Windows 98, Windows NT, or Windows 2000 in this situation. However, the behavior of calling functions in the DLL that reference static TLS variables is undefined. On Microsoft Windows 95, `LoadLibrary` fails and the `GetLastError` function returns 1114 - ERROR_DLL_INIT_FAILED (A dynamic link library initialization routine failed). On Windows 2000, the `LoadLibrary` function succeeds. However, any attempt to access the TLS data causes an access violation (AV).

## CAUSE

This is a limitation of `LoadLibrary` and `__declspec`. The global variable space for a thread is allocated at run time. The size is based on a calculation of the requirements of the application plus the requirements of all of the libraries that are statically linked. If a DLL uses static TLS and is dynamic-linked in an application, when `LoadLibrary` or `FreeLibrary` is called, the system must find all the threads that exist in the process and enlarge or compact their TLS memory according to the size of static TLS in the newly loaded DLL. This process is too much for operating systems to manage, which can cause an exception either when the DLL is dynamically loaded or code references the data.

## RESOLUTION

DLLs that use `__declspec(thread)` should not be loaded with `LoadLibrary`.

The DLL code should be modified to use such TLS functions as `TlsAlloc`, and to allocate TLS if the DLL might be loaded with `LoadLibrary`. Or, the DLL that is using `__declspec(thread)` should only be implicitly loaded into the application.

## MORE INFORMATION

To determine whether a DLL uses static TLS, the Dumpbin.exe tool can be used to dump the header information. A DLL has static TLS if the OPTIONAL HEADER VALUES contains a size that is greater than 0 (zero) in the Thread Storage Directory, as follows:

```
517B20 [ 18] RVA [size] of Thread Storage Directory
```
